We've seen that ventricular contraction results in the QRS complex.
Whenever you're trying to do with the EKG signal,
whether you're looking at heart rates,
or looking for an abnormal rhythm,
or evidence of some other cardiovascular condition,
the first step is generally to find these heartbeats.
Right off the bat this gives you information about the heart rate, and the rhythm,
and provides important context for when you're doing
more complex processing to know where in the EKG signal the heartbeat actually are.
Where we find the individual heartbeats is by
using an algorithm called the Pan-Tompkins algorithm.
Pan and Tompkins were researchers who in the '80s,
came up with this method for detecting QRS complexes,
that's still in widespread use today.
So we'll go into the details of a pared down version of the Pan-Tompkins algorithm.
Whenever you're doing any kind of event detection in time-series data like this,
you want to start with pre-processing steps that will
boost the signal and attenuate the noise.
For Pan-Tompkins, we start with a bandpass filter that selects for
frequencies that are found within
the QRS complex and suppresses frequencies outside of that band.
Then we do a one-sample difference and you can think of this as a derivative operation.
So we're looking at slopes here and we see that the QRS complex
has these really sharp slopes and the other waves are shallower.
So we're hoping that this difference operation will preserve
these sharp slopes and suppress some of these other waves.
The next thing we do is an element-wise square,
which we'll see what that does to the signal in just a moment.
Finally, we do a moving sum over a fixed window length.
This takes advantage of the fact that the QRS complex generally has
a fixed width in time of a 150 milliseconds.
So if we tune this moving sum window to a 150 milliseconds,
we can fully take advantage of all the energy in the QRS complex.
For other spikes that might occur elsewhere in the wave,
that would either be longer or shorter than this,
the moving sum will attenuate them.
Then our detection steps will be fairly simple.
We'll just do a peak detection and then some thresholding on
the peaks to make sure that we find the largest ones
which correspond to the QRS complexes.
Next, we'll look at some actual code for
this algorithm and run it on data from a wearable device.